---
layout: post
title:  "Using StatefulTractogram in pyAFQ"
date:   2019-12-16
---

Last week, I traveled to Austin, TX, to work with Tal Yarkoni on a new project,
about which some other time. When I travel, I somehow have more time than usual
to sit and program: late at night, early in the morning and on airplanes seem to
be good times to focus somehow. This time, I had the opportunity to overhaul our
approach to representation of tractography results in pyAFQ. One of the
challenges of using tractography results is keeping track of the coordinate
frame relative to which the three-dimensional curves are represented. In
particular, as streamlines are brought in and out of register with other data,
such as maps of diffusion MRI metrics. A recent development by Francois Rheault
on DIPY is a class for stateful representation of tractograms. This was added in
version 1.0 ([pr](https://github.com/nipy/dipy/pull/1812)) and continues to
evolve in the 1.x series ([here](https://github.com/nipy/dipy/pull/2008) and
[here](https://github.com/nipy/dipy/pull/2013)). This is a really good step
forward in that it takes care of transformations efficiently and consistently,
making sure that the resulting representation is consistent and correct.
Overhauling our codebase to use this has been interesting and informative. In
particular, it is not always clear when to shift to this type of object (rather
than lists of arrays and ArraySequence objects) when working on functions that
require multiple steps (e.g., in our waypoint ROI based segmentation). As noted
in [one of the prs linked above)([here](https://github.com/nipy/dipy/pull/2013))
it's also common to want to initialize a new object based on the data in another
object, and the risk of losing one or more bits of metadata can be a source of
error. Nevertheless, this is clearly an improvement and the hope is that this
data structure will serve as a good basis for other data structures that we
would like to implement next. For example, bundles associated with particular
anatomical structures and collections of these bundles.