---
layout: post
title:  "DIPY IVIM with the variable projection method"
date:   2019-09-09
categories: dMRI, models, DIPY
---

Shreyas Fadnavis, a graduate student in
[Eleftheiros Garyfallidis's lab](https://grg.sice.indiana.edu/) has been
diligently building a line of research on better ways to model perfusion and
diffusion in the same pulsed-gradient spin echo, with a model called IVIM, which
stands for intravoxel incoherent motion. This model has been around for a
surprisingly long time, with Denis Lebihan's first papers on the topic going
back to the 1980's and preceding work on DTI. Fueled by the utility of the model
in clinical use-cases in oncology, there has been resurgent interest in using
IVIM. This motivates improvements to the way that the model is fit. The main
challenge is that the model posits that the signal is a mixture of two
exponential decay components: one for diffusion, and the other for perfusion.
The separation of these components is supposed to be facilitated by the
measurement of very low b-values that should only be affected by perfusion, but
the fact of the matter is that fitting is still rather challenging.

To address this, Shreyas and Eleftherios developed a method for fitting the
model that harnesses the [MIX framework](https://www.nature.com/articles/srep38927)
to propose better initial conditions for optimization. The method is
already implemented in DIPY and is now also described in a forthcoming manuscript,
which I spent some time reading, commenting on and making some small suggestions
on last week.


