---
layout: post
title:  "Releasing pyAFQ 0.1"
date:   2020-01-15
---

Just as the year started, and after several years of slow development, we
finally released a version 0.1 of [pyAFQ](https://yeatmanlab.github.io/pyAFQ/).
The core functionality of this software is to segment tractography solutions
into bundles of streamlines that represent major brain tracts, such as the
corticospinal tract, which connects the primary motor cortex with the spinal
cord, or the arcuate fasciculus, which connects the temporal lobe with the
frontal lobe and plays an important role in language functions. The algorithm
for bundle segmentation is based on previous work by Jason Yeatman that was
published
[a while ago](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0049790).
A large part of the motivation for reimplementing these ideas in Python is that
this allows us to take advantage of the developments we are making in DIPY. For
example, it should allow us to use the large collection of diffusion MRI
reconstruction algorithms implemented in DIPY. The core segmentation algorithm,
using a strategy that combines waypoint ROIs through which each streamline in a
bundle must cross and a probabilistic atlas, was implemented over a rather long
period of time, and tested on some sample datasets, as well as on the Human
Connectome Project dataset. We had initially implemented a command-line interface
that used argparser to parse input arguments, but there are many options that
can be used in modeling the diffusion in each voxel, using these models in
tractography and in creating scalar values, and in the manner in which segmentation
is executed (e.g., whether or not and how to clean a bundle after segmentation,
to produce a more compact and coherent bundle that conforms with our idea of a tract).
This made the CLI rather clunky. To deal with this, we now use an additional
configuration file that customizes each one of these steps. This is a TOML
file that follows a particular division into sections, based on stages of the
analysis with a set of key-word arguments in each section. One nice thing is that
introspection allows us to set defaults once in the executing function (for
example, in a [tracking function](https://github.com/yeatmanlab/pyAFQ/blob/master/AFQ/tractography.py#L16))
and then use a [simple introspection pattern](https://github.com/yeatmanlab/pyAFQ/blob/master/AFQ/utils/bin.py#L61) (thank you, SO!)
to read out these values and replace them only if they are defined in the configuration file.
This should hopefully make a rather complicated API, with multiple steps of analysis and lots
of knobs to twiddle, rather straightforward to control and run.